652- docs: updated the README with a getting started guide (#757)
ScottLogic/datahelix: README.md

Finally, before exploring some more interesting features of the generator, we'll add a field for National Insurance number. In this case, the constraints applied to the field ensure that it only has a value if the age is greater than or equal to 16:

~~~json
{
  "schemaVersion": "0.1",
  "fields": [
    { "name": "firstName" },
    { "name": "age" },
    { "name": "nationalInsurance" }
  ],
  "rules": [
    {
      "rule": "first name",
      "constraints": [
        { "field": "firstName", "is": "ofType", "value": "string" },
        { "not": { "field": "firstName", "is": "null" } },
        { "field": "firstName", "is": "matchingRegex", "value": "(Joh?n|Mar[yk])" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "rule": "age",
      "constraints": [
        { "field": "age", "is": "ofType", "value": "numeric" },
        { "field": "age", "is": "greaterThan", "value": 0 },
        { "field": "age", "is": "lessThan", "value": 100 },
        { "not": { "field": "age", "is": "null" } }
      ]
    },
    {
      "rule": "national insurance",
      "constraints": [
        { "field": "nationalInsurance", "is": "ofType", "value": "string" },
        
        {
          "if": {
            "field": "age",

>             "is": "greaterThanOrEqual",

Reviewer: Should be `"is": "greaterThanOrEqualTo"`

Author: well spotted!

            "value": 16
          },

>           "then": {

Reviewer: This then block outputs null values in the output (on release V0.0.5) which might be confusing to new users. Replacing it with the block below will stop the null values appearing.
```
          "then": {
            "allOf": [
              {
                "field": "nationalInsurance",
                "is": "matchingRegex",
                "value": "[A-CEGHJ-PR-TW-Z]{1}[A-CEGHJ-NPR-TW-Z]{1}[0-9]{6}[A-DFM]{0,1}"
              },
              { "not": { "field": "nationalInsurance", "is": "null" } } 
            ]
          }
```

~~~
$ java -jar generator.jar generate --violate --dont-violate=ofType null \
  --max-rows=100 --overwrite profile.json out
~~~

Or, alternatively, you can re-arrange your constraints so that the ones that define types / null, are grouped as a single rule. After By re-grouping constraints, the following output, with random strings that violate the regex constraint, is generated:

firstName,age,nationalInsurance
"",43,"PT530853D"
"&#48583;",56,"GE797875M"
"&#37030;&#29187;",84,"JA172890M"
"J&#14339;&#25031;&#22289;&#12961;&#20459;&#26440;",32,"AE613401F"
"&#20469;&#53921;",38,"TS256211F"
"M",60,"GE987171M"
"M",7,
"M&#42894;&#4741;&#59414;&#21101;&#42596;&#21708;&#53662;&#44242;",97,"EN082475C"
")",80,"BX025130C"
",&#9281;&#51869;",60,"RW177969"
"5&#6275;&#54430;&#65199;&#17599;&#22267;",57,"RY904705"
[...]

> **NOTE** - the above is not formatted as a code block because GitHub flavor markdown doesn't support the unicode character set which th generator outputs. On a related note, we are considering adding a feature that allows you to [specify / restrict the character set](https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/issues/294) in a future release.

Reviewer 2: If you use ``` instead of ~~~ it might resolve the issue?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/44162572/54591421-1a2cd500-4a22-11e9-8c2e-f4cf55134eb9.png)

Reviewer 2: Ah, missed the point here.

How about this?

```
firstName,age,nationalInsurance
"�",43,"PT530853D"
"뷇",56,"GE797875M"
"邦爃",84,"JA172890M"
"J㠃懇圑㊡俫杈",32,"AE613401F"
"俵튡",38,"TS256211F"
"M",60,"GE987171M"
"M",7,
"Mꞎኅ剭Ꙥ哌톞곒",97,"EN082475C"
")",80,"BX025130C"
",⑁쪝",60,"RW177969"
"5ᢃ풞ﺯ䒿囻",57,"RY904705" 
[...]
```

Reviewer 2: @ColinEberhardt I've just pushed to your branch, i think this fixes the output/code-block issue

Author: > I've just pushed to your branch, i think this fixes the output/code-block issue

Cool - thanks for fixing that. Although I'd still like to maintain the note about character sets that referenced the relevant issue. It is a good demonstration of some of the things we are thinking about post-beta.

Reviewer 2: Note reintroduced.

## Next steps

> That's the end of our getting started guide. Hopefully it has given you a good understanding of what the DataHelix generator is capable of. If you'd like to find out more about the various constraints the tool supports, the [Profile Developer Guide](???) is a good next step.

Reviewer: Might want to highlight the [examples folder](https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/tree/master/examples) here as well as any documentation.

The generator has been written in Java, allowing it to work on Microsoft Windows, Apple Mac and Linux. You will need Java v1.8 installed to run the generator (you can run `java version` to check whether you meet ths requirement), it can be [downloaded here](https://www.java.com/en/download/manual.jsp).

The generator is distributed as a JAR file, with the latest release always available from the [GitHub releases page](https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/releases/). The project is currently in beta and under active development. You can expect breaking changes in future releases, and new features too!

Your feedback on the beta would be greatly appreciated. If you have any issues, feature requests, or ideas, please share them via the [GitHub issues page](https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/issues).

## Creating your first profile

Profiles are JSON files that describe the data you want to generate. They are composed of:

 - **fields** -  an array of uniquely named fields (or columns).
 - **rules** - an array of constraints, with an optional description.

>  - **constraints** - reduce the data for a given column

Author: this description feels a little too concise. Ideas?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - **constraints** - restrict the types and ranges of data permitted for the given column
```

We'll start by generating data for a trivial schema. Using your favourite text editor, create the following JSON profile and save it as `profile.json`:

~~~json
{
  "schemaVersion": "0.1",
  "fields": [
    { "name": "firstName" }
  ],

>   "rules": []

Reviewer 3: this is not a valid profile against the current JSON schema (must have at least one rule)

Reviewer 2: @mrspaceman I thought we permitted unconstrained profiles...?

Reviewer 3: I had specified that we need at least one rule, but I can change it easily.

}
~~~

Now place the `generator.jar` file (downloaded from the [GitHub releases page](https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/releases/) in the same folder as the profile, open up a terminal, and execute the following:

~~~
$ java -jar generator.jar generate --max-rows=100 --overwrite profile.json output.csv
Generation started at: 08:02:52

Number of rows | Velocity (rows/sec) | Velocity trend
---------------+---------------------+---------------
100            | 0                   | - 
~~~

> <!-- bug velocity not right -->

Author: see: https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/issues/763

## Adding constraints

Update the JSON profile as follows:

~~~json
{
  "schemaVersion": "0.1",
  "fields": [
    { "name": "firstName" }
  ],
  "rules": [
    {
      "rule": "first name constraints",
      "constraints": [
        { "field": "firstName", "is": "ofType", "value": "string" },
        { "field": "firstName", "is": "matchingRegex", "value": "[a-z]{1,10}" }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
~~~

Re-running generation now creates a file containing random strings that match the simple regex `[a-z]{1,10}`:

~~~
firstName
"f"

"draxonsa"
"j"
"srsub"

"f"

[...]
~~~

Fields are nullable by default, however, you can add a further constraint to a field to indicate it is 'not null'. If you add the following constraint, the generator will no longer output null values:

~~~json
"constraints": [
  { "field": "firstName", "is": "ofType", "value": "string" },
  { "field": "firstName", "is": "matchingRegex", "value": "[a-z]{1,10}" },
  { "not": { "field": "firstName", "is": "null" } }
]
~~~

The generator supports three different types of constraint. These are:

>  - **Predicates** - boolean-valued functions that define whether a given value as valid or invalid. In the above profile `ofType` and `matchingRegex` are examples of predicates.

Author: yes ... I am proposing a name change here. I'm not keen on the term 'epistemic'!

 - **Grammatical** - combine or modify other constraints. They are fully recursive; any grammatical constraint is a valid input to any other grammatical constraint. In the above profile `not` is an example of a grammatical constraint. 

>  - **Presentational** - provide additional formatting information, we'll cover these later.

Author: Can anyone think of a good example for this? I haven't actually covered them.

Reviewer 2: - Formatting? 
- Output? 
- Serialisation?

Formatting seems the best, but maybe thats because we only have one constraint in this group, the `formattedAs` constraint!

Author: Ah - I actually meant a specific example that made sense in the context of this getting started guide!

Reviewer 2: I cant think of a good example with the fields you have, presentation constraints are best performed with datetimes or with larger (or high precision) numbers.

Author: OK, perhaps leave this for now.

The current profile outputs random text strings for the `firstName` field. Depending on what you are intending to use this data for this may or may not be appropriate. For testing purposes, you are likely to want output data that has a lot of variability, however, if you are using the generator to create simulation data, you might want to use a regex that creates more realistic data, for example the regex `(Joh?n|Mar[yk])`.

## Generating large datasets

The generator has been designed to be fast and efficient, allowing you to generate large quantities of test and simulation data. If you supply a large number for the `--max-rows` option, the data will be streamed to the output file, with the progress / velocity reported during generation.

```

> $ java -jar generator.jar generate --max-rows=10000 --overwrite profile.json out.csv

Reviewer 2: is it better to keep the output filename the same, here its `out.csv` but earlier you use `output.csv`, minor point I know!

Author: good spot!

Generation started at: 16:41:44

Number of rows | Velocity (rows/sec) | Velocity trend
---------------+---------------------+---------------
1477           | 1477                | + 
4750           | 3271                | + 
9348           | 4597                | + 
10000          | 0                   | - 
```

If the generation is taking too long, you can halt the command via <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd>

## Data types

The generator supports four different data types:

 - **integer** - any integer that can be defined by the Java [BigDecimal](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/math/BigDecimal.html) type
 - **decimal** - any real number (again a BigDecimal), with an optional granularity / precision that can be defined via a `granularTo` constraint.
 - **string** - sequences of unicode characters

>  - **temporal** - specific moments in time, with values in the range 0001-01-01T00:00 to 9999-12-31T23:59

Author: see: https://github.com/ScottLogic/datahelix/issues/761

      "constraints": [
        { "field": "firstName", "is": "ofType", "value": "string" },
        { "not": { "field": "firstName", "is": "null" } },
        { "field": "firstName", "is": "matchingRegex", "value": "(Joh?n|Mar[yk])" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "rule": "age",
      "constraints": [
        { "field": "age", "is": "ofType", "value": "numeric" },
        { "field": "age", "is": "greaterThan", "value": 0 },
        { "field": "age", "is": "lessThan", "value": 100 },
        { "not": { "field": "age", "is": "null" } }
      ]
    },
    {
      "rule": "national insurance",
      "constraints": [
        { "field": "nationalInsurance", "is": "ofType", "value": "string" },
        { "not": { "field": "nationalInsurance", "is": "null" } },
        {
          "if": {
            "field": "age",
            "is": "greaterThan",
            "value": 15
          },
          "then": {
            "field": "nationalInsurance",
            "is": "matchingRegex",
            "value": "[A-CEGHJ-PR-TW-Z]{1}[A-CEGHJ-NPR-TW-Z]{1}[0-9]{6}[A-DFM]{0,1}"
          },
          "else": {
            "field": "nationalInsurance",
            "is": "equalTo",

>             "value": "N/A"

Reviewer 2: How about calling out the way of specifying that the value must be missing/`null`

i.e. 

```
"field": "nationalInsurance",
"is": "null"
```

Demonstrates more ways to use the generator. You would need to move the not(is null) from before the if, and include it in the _then_ part though.

Author: nide idea

          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
~~~

The above profile yields the following output:

~~~
firstName,age,nationalInsurance
"Mary",85,"RP139559B"
"Jon",2,"N/A"
"Mark",10,"N/A"
"Mary",20,"NW372471"
"Mark",47,"ZP195766"
"Jon",41,"RW557276F"
"Mark",16,"N/A"
"Jon",69,"OR650886"
"John",19,"CB460473"
"Mark",55,"AE656210B"
"Mark",68,"ER027015"
[...]
~~~

You can find out more about the various constraints the generator supports in the detailed [Profile Developer Guide](???).

## Generation modes

The generator supports a number of different generation modes:

>  - **random** - generates random data that abides by the given set of constraints, with the potentially infinite output limited via the `--num-rows` option.

Reviewer 2: The switch is currently `--max-rows`.

Also, if this switch isn't supplied you'd get 1000 rows of random data, there is no (longer the) possibility of generating infinite amounts of random data

 - **interesting** - generates data that is typically deemed 'interesting' from a test perspective, for example exploring [boundary values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boundary-value_analysis).

> The mode is specified via the `--generation-mode` option. The following example outputs 'inetersting' vaues for the current profile:

Reviewer 2: Typo in "inetersting"

"John",18,"AJ000000F"
"Jon",19,"AA000000"
"John",19,"AA000000"
"Jon",19,"AJ000000F"
"John",19,"AJ000000F"
"Jon",1,"N/A"
"John",1,"N/A"
"Jon",99,"AA000000"
"John",99,"AA000000"
"Jon",99,"AJ000000F"
"John",99,"AJ000000F"
~~~

<!-- I've got a few questions about this output! -->

## Generating invalid data

One of the most powerful features of the generator is its ability to generate data that violates constraints. To create invalid data use the `--violate` command line option. This time you need to specify an output directory rather than a file:

~~~
$ java -jar generator.jar generate --violate --max-rows=100 --overwrite profile.json out
~~~

When the above command has finished, you'll find that the generator has created an `out` directory which has four files:

~~~
$ ls out
1.csv           2.csv           3.csv           manifest.json
~~~

The manifest file details which rules have been violated in each of the output files:

~~~
{
  "cases": [
    {
      "filePath": "1",
      "violatedRules": ["first name"]
    },
    {
      "filePath": "2",
      "violatedRules": ["age"]
    },
    {
      "filePath": "3",
      "violatedRules": ["national insurance"]
    }
  ]
}
~~~

> If you take a look at the generated file `1.csv` you'll see that data for the `firstName` field does not objy the given constraints, whilst those for `age` anf `nationalInsurance` are correct:

Reviewer 2: Typeo "anf"

~~~
firstName,age,nationalInsurance
-619248029,71,"HT849919"
08-12-2001 02:53:16,15,"N/A"
"Lorem Ipsum",11,"N/A"
"Lorem Ipsum",71,"WX004081"
1263483797,19,"HG054666"
,75,"GE023082"
"Lorem Ipsum",59,"ZM850737C"
[...]
~~~

However, it might be a surprise to see nulls, numbers and dates as values for the `firstName` field alongside strings that do not match the regex given in the profile. This is because these are all defined as a single rule within the profile. You have a couple of options if you want to ensure that `firstName` is not null and a string, the first is to inform the generator that it should not violate specific constraint types:

~~~
$ java -jar generator.jar generate --violate --dont-violate=ofType null \
  --max-rows=100 --overwrite profile.json out
~~~

Or, alternatively, you can re-arrange your constraints so that the ones that define types / null, are grouped as a single rule. After By re-grouping constraints, the following output, with random strings that violate the regex constraint, is generated:

~~~

> firstName,age,nationalInsurance

Author: TODO: encoding issues! Github failed to render this file as markdown, so I tried to replace chars with entities. However, as this is a fenced code block, these entities were not translated.

This does open up a bigger discussion. What if I want violating data, but not from such a broad range of unicode characters?

Reviewer 2: See #294 for discussion around this topic, it needs plenty of additional thought though

"",43,"PT530853D"
"&#48583;",56,"GE797875M"
"&#37030;&#29187;",84,"JA172890M"
"J&#14339;&#25031;&#22289;&#12961;&#20459;&#26440;",32,"AE613401F"
"&#20469;&#53921;",38,"TS256211F"
"M",60,"GE987171M"
"M",7,"N/A"
"M&#42894;&#4741;&#59414;&#21101;&#42596;&#21708;&#53662;&#44242;",97,"EN082475C"
")",80,"BX025130C"
",&#9281;&#51869;",60,"RW177969"
"5&#6275;&#54430;&#65199;&#17599;&#22267;",57,"RY904705"
[...]
~~~

## Next steps

> That's the end of our getting started guide. Hopefully it has given you a good understanding of what the DataHelix generator is capable. If you'd like to find out more about the various constraints the tools supports, the [Profile Developer Guide](???) is a good next step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's the end of our getting started guide. Hopefully it has given you a good understanding of what the DataHelix generator is capable of. If you'd like to find out more about the various constraints the tool supports, the [Profile Developer Guide](???) is a good next step.
```
